---
title: "Agile development"
author: "JJ Merelo"
date: "27/5/2022"
output: html_document
bibliography: ../mlops.bib
---

# Introduction

MLOps [@kreuzberger2022machine,@tamburri2020sustainable,@battina2019intelligent] is the combination of the terms and practices of machine
learning and DevOps.

> And DevOps is the combination of all phases and roles in a development team
into each and every member of the team, who will in turn act as code writers, QA
leaders and system programmers.

The objective of machine learning (ML) is to create models from data that can be
used for prediction, classification or visualization, solving specific problems
for specific customers. If you combine that with DevOps, what we have is the
reproducible and seamless creation of ML workflows that can be continuously
deployed to production.

Scientific computing and development, which includes data *science*, has been
generally separated from mainstream best practices in companies; this is in part
due to the fact that science works through public funding and not with a
customer or new product, and also to the traditional division of science in
silos.

DevOps was an attempt to break silos (Development, QA, Ops) in
software engineering; MLOps tries to break silos in machine learning,
and possibly, in time, in data science.

> By data science I mean the academic part of it.

This course, or this material, depending on how you arrive at it, is mainly
addressed at students that have been living in
*traditional* scientific computing environments, and will try to endow them with
an *agile* mindset that will be an useful skill if they want to jump from
academia to the industry; if they are already in the industry, it will try to
help them get acquainted with data science concepts and techniques that will
help them jump-start a career in the coveted *data engineering* wage bracket.

Hope this is useful for anyone arriving here from anywhere, before, during or
after the in-person summer course.

## The keys to data science

As revealed in many articles such as [this
one](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/4-key-pillars-of-data-science/), being a
successful data scientist of engineer requires a wide range of different
skills.

1. First, domain knowledge is necessary. Since software engineers always solve
   someone's problem, the engineer has to become an expert in this domain in
   order to provide meaningful and useful solutions. This means that a machine
   learning problem, the same as a workshop, must start with choosing a domain
   and the intention and drive to solve a problem in that domain. *Not* in an
   already created and static dataset.
2. Math skills are also needed to understand, if nothing else, what validation
   results mean, and how you need to select a model based on comparison with
   other models or the baseline. If you are in academia, you will probably need
   to go a bit further tweaking hyperparamenters, and combining algorithms (or
   your paper will be rejected), but even basic industrial data scientists need
   to have some knowledge about statistics.
3. The data scientist needs to know and follow best practices in software
   development, but also be acquainted with the tools, services and languages
   currently used by modern developments. This includes DevOps and QA, which
   will be incorporated in the ML/DS domain as MLOps.
4. Communication and visualization skills: unlike software engineers, data
   engineers need to eventually deliver not only a product, but also the
   solution to the problem that has been reached through that product. In some
   cases, visualization is all that's going to be needed; in others,
   visualization will be the last phase in a data pipeline.


## Steps in MLOps

MLOps consists in the automation, within the framework of an agile team, of the
following steps:

1. Data extraction and engineering.
2. Model development and engineering.
3. Continuous training.
4. Storage in model registries.
5. Continuous deployment.

During the duration of this course, we'll try to go through these steps,
starting with the very important step 0: create valuable products and develop
using an agile mindset.

## Read also

The site [Machine Learning Operations](https://ml-ops.org/) is a
collection of concepts and tutorials about MLOps.
