---
title: "Agile development"
author: "JJ Merelo"
date: "27/5/2022"
output: html_document
bibliography: ../mlops.bib
---
# Agile development

## TL;DR

Machine learning must focus in solving specific problems, and thus should follow
the best practices in software engineering. In this introduction we'll talk
about agile development and how it applies to science, and specifically data
science.

## Learning outcomes of this unit

This session is mainly related to learning outcome A, "Understand the
fundamental principles of agile development". By the end of this session the
student should be able to choose a problem to work in, and understand the
principles of agile development as applied to machine learning.

## Agile (Data) science

In software engineering circles, *agile* is a mindset that helps solve problems
putting client first, and focusing on having always minimally viable products.

Science, and data science, needs not be different; we need to put the problem first,
and not any kind of proxies to that problem in the way of reports or papers or
participation in competitions. This is why the manifesto for agile data science
was proposed [@agiledatascience], which not only tries to make data science more
efficient, but also close the gap between academic and industry practitioners.

In order to do that, you need to use the tools that are standard in the
industry, such as source control, team work, and continuous integration/delivery
tools, supplemented with specific machine learning tools, such as model
registries.

## Keys to agile development

First thing you have to take into account that, unlike the *waterfall*
methodology that preceded it, *agile* is a set of best practices, never a
*methodology*, and of course not a single *methodology*. It mainly integrates
many different trends in software development that happened by the end of the
20th century, and that allowed software *teams* to deliver value faster and with
higher efficiency. By *deliver value* we mean to actually make something that
impacts the bottom line from the organization you're integrated it, be it a
company or a research group, or a mixture of both.

Essentially, a waterfall technology, called that way because when charted it
looked like a waterfall, with the different steps, planning, testing, coding,
deploying, being sequential and totally independent of every other, was too
rigid, couldn't respond quickly to changing environments, but the main problem
is that it didn't deliver value until the very end, that is, until you arrived
at wherever the waterfall created the pool. This could be OK for a certain kind
of projects, and certainly a big advantage when it was created, by Margaret
Hamilton, for mission-critical software projects.

In reality, however, it created a series of problems.

* Silos
* Bad knowledge transmission
* Stress



So let's put it to work in the following steps. Please check out
[@agiledatascience] for reference.

## Problem goes first

Data science needs to solve a problem. Either getting some insight on a problem,
or provide some easy way to reach decisions, some times both. You need to understand
the nature of the problem before settling down to work on it.

## References

As stated, [@agiledatascience] is one of the main documents that should be
followed. Thoughtful Machine Learning [@kirk2014thoughtful] will probably help too.

## Activity


