---
title: "MLOps: Design thinking"
author: "JJ Merelo"
date: "26/6/2022"
output: html_document
bibliography: ../mlops.bib
---

# Design thinking

## TL;DR

Formulating a solution to a problem is never straightforward. Understanding the
problem and the customer is essential for designing a successful machine
learning workflow or application that meets what the customer wishes.

## Learning outcomes of this unit

Understand the process of kickstarting a machine learning project by
focusing on a client needs, and working towards solving that problem
through precise stages.

## What are we talking about

Design thinking is a technique, taken from the design community, that
tries to find out the needs of a specific target group in order to
create a product that fulfills, at least in part, those needs
[@designthinking]. It spans all the process from product design to the
creation of a startup, or how a whole company will fulfill their objectives.

In data science, as in any software development project, one of the
hardest part is to find a way to deliver value to a client; even more
so, to actually find there's a client for your product and who would
that be.

Most data science and engineering tutorials start with already existing
datasets; which is nice because you can easily compare the performance of your
method, or your team, against others. However, no, no one is interested in a
product that tells you who among the Titanic crew or travelers is going to croak
or what kind of iris flower we are dealing with looking at the petals and
sepals.

You are probably interested in some things that are closer to
yourself, your hobbies or your issues. Or you might be actually
interested in creating a product in a startup. In any case, you need
to go, find out who that person would be (not if it is yourself, of course) and
find a way to deliver value. Design thinking will help you with that.

## Design thinking in 5 easy steps

The *design* part of design thinking comes from actual design; it
mimics the process uses in designing user interfaces or products. In
general, science and software development could learn a lot from this
process. While in science (and engineering) we are paper or product
oriented, design is customer oriented.

### Empathize

DT is user centered, and thus it needs you to understand, first and
foremost, the needs of the user; in order to do that, the designer
needs to put him or herself in the place of the user, and think what
they would wish; how to add value to them.

Many of the examples in this course will be centered in, well, me,
since I am the customer I have more handy. That will certainly be the
case in most students of this course, with family and friends being
closely seconds or thirds.

I have create data pipelines in several occasions: during the COVID
pandemic, my main worry was to know when *the curve* was reaching its
peak, and so when the incredibly (some people might say absurdly)
strict lockdown we were suffering in Spain would be lifted. So my main
objective was to try and analyze, daily, how the tide was turning and
when it might definitely turn against COVID.

Currently my worries go more in the direction of the current state of
affairs with the unprovoked attack on Ukraine and the subsequent
genocidal actuation of Russian armed forces. The fog of war, however,
makes it difficult to ascertain how far away from Russia's defeat
Ukraine is.

In general, the design process will start with some piece of news or a post in
social networks, some concern shared by a friend or relative, or the obvious
need of a paying client. In any of these cases, their stories need to be heard
and you need to get in their shoes to be able to create a (data) product that
satisfies them.

In a project we were involved, a company that was writing software for
editorials asked us to come up with a way to find out how much a book
was going to sell. They had hard data for every book sold in Spain
for a few years; columns and columns of data. For instance, it
included how many copies were sold in big department stores, and how
many in other kind of book sellers.

Using our scientist goggles, we cried "Data!" and used every column
they could give us. When we presented that result, the software
company was not happy. We were simply eliminated sales from the input
column, but *many other quantities were correlated and caused by
sales*, such as the aforementioned sales in specialized bookstores or
department stores.

We needed to empathize with the editorials and really understand what
kind of data was available to them when they had a fresh manuscript in
their hands and needed to send an order to the printing house and tell
them to print 30, or 2000, or 10K. Printing, shipping, storing is
expensive; lost sales when a book is in back order also cost money. So
we needed to reduce all those beautiful, plentiful columns to just a
few: genre, known author, things like that. Only by understanding and
feeling the same pain as the (ultimate) customer, they could be
satisfied.

And they were. This piece of software (that ultimately used a
multilayer perceptron) was incorporated into a bigger editorial
management software, and they lost less money printing the right
amount of books; our customer sold more licenses to their software,
and we... We managed to publish a few more papers [@Castillo2016books].

### Define

From understanding the user and what they want, you need to define the
product that you (in most cases, with the help of your team) will
create. There are myriad different kind of products that you can
create using computers, and every one will solve a different
problem. But without a real problem to solve, it's impossible to
actually create a product that solves it.

In the problems stated above, for me one of the problems was not knowing when
the lockdown would help.

In the case of the war in Ukraine, finding out if the situation was getting better
or worse for the Ukrainians. That's a defined problem. Thus, I will try (and use
in this course) some data
sources, mainly so-called OSINT (open source intelligence) sources,
that try to shed some light on the subject. With the problem definition, in the
case of a data science project, we will probably need to find out whether we
have a data source to be used for it, or not; obviously, we will not be able to
solve it in the latter case.

Besides, we need to find out what kind of data engineering or machine learning
we have in our hands. We might want to predict (When will the war end?) or
explore the data (Is the situation right now more similar to the initial one, or
has something fundamental changed?) or maybe to just automatically visualize in
a chart some specific quantity (How has the number of vehicles destroyed
evolved?).

In a project we created for what is now part of a big financial
prediction and assessment conglomerate, we had to predict the
situation of a company up to three years down the line. We had data
for most companies in Spain.

The main problem, however, was not whether the company would tank or
not. Was to avoid an angry company CEO of the company calling our
customer because they had been told that their company was going to go
bust.

> That problem was not totally avoided, however; companies go bust
> anyway.

What we needed then was to come up with a way to explain what was
going on, besides actually making a black box prediction. We needed
some sort of clustering or visualization. This clustering revealed
what kind of features led to the company going belly-up; for instance,
one of them included old companies that were part of a conglomerate
and that had low churn of assets (or suchlike, I don't really
remember). In that case, apparently, the parent company just shuttered
them and employees were distributed among other companies in the
conglomerate. By *actually* defining the problem, which in this case
was not only to classify (healthy, broke) but also to explain the
reasons why this was happening, we got our customer satisfied (and
also a bunch of papers [@mora2010applying,@alfaro2009finding].

In the case of the Ukraine MoD data, it is not entirely clear what we
would want  to obtain from it. The general idea is to find something
about the course of the war, and how much it will last, or simply how
bad or good is the situation for Ukraine. Defining the problem will
have to start with a general visualization of data, general
correlations between the different columns. In general, anyway, we
will have to obtain or transform data so that we obtain daily changes
in them. Once we have these *deltas*, the actual result of the ML
pipeline will have to be defined in the next phase.

### Ideate

You obviously need to think the kind of product you are going to create to solve
the problem. It can be a library, a set of charts, an app, or simply a
periodically updated report that visualizes a specific aspect of what you are
going to do. This rough idea will need to possibly to through a series of
iterations, and will also depend on the time and resources you and your team
have to do it. It will have, anyway, to consistently deliver value to the
customer by solving their problem.

It is in this phase where you can use other methodologies to come up with a
rough sketch of a product. Ikea, for instance, has 5
principles of what they call *democratic* design: Form, Function,
Aesthetics, Sustainability and Price [@Ikea].

We will probably need to explain
a bit further the two first ones: *form* relates to how some product
embeds itself in the living environment; it applies to packaging
too. For instance, you need to create couches that integrate well with
low tables, or chairs that integrate themselves with high tables. A
microwave oven has to be rectangular, and so on. In terms of software
engineering, we need to create products that are well integrated
within the current systems and processes of the company; in terms of
data science, we need to use whatever resources we have available; if
our lab (or company) does not have enough money for an Nvidia
Tesla GPU, we will have to make do with our laptop or the server our
lab has access to.

Function, or course, relates to what the product needs to do. It needs
to be able to do so efficiently, and convey whatever information you
need to convey, or use the data and make the decisions you need to
make. For instance, I remember a project with a company where we
needed to predict book sales. One of the inputs we had was correlated
to sales; number of editions if I remember correctly. Obviously, using
this as an input will make output depend exclusively on that; but also
obviously, the number of editions is not going to be available when
you are releasing a new book and need to find out how many units it's
going to move. The "Function" mantra is an user-centered one, and you
need to follow it closely.

> This is one of the reason why I shy away from using already
> established datasets when teaching data science. Those datasets
> already have inputs and outputs clearly mapped, hiding the
> complexity of the design of a real product under the rug and banning
> the user from actually having to figure out this actual part of the
> process.

The rest is more or less obvious; all five principles will act as
constraints in this design thinking process. Which also has 5 phases:

In the cases mentioned above, several options were possible. For instance, a
periodically updated visualization of the evolution of the number of cases.

![Number of COVID cases in
Spain](https://github.com/JJ/covid-reports/raw/master/gifs/totales-point.gif)

Several other publications in RPubs were updated manually, check out [the page
that lists them all](https://jj.github.io/covid-reports).

In the case of the invasion of Ukraine, however, creating a library
that allowed anyone to extract data seemed like a better idea, so
that's what we will be developing here. The concrete machine learning
problem that we will try to solve will be related to predicting the
course of the war.

In the already mentioned case above, trying to predict book sales, the
main problem was that the software company wanted to integrate the
algorithm into a desktop application. Our algorithm used a mixture of
C++ and Perl to set up training and exploitation. We eventually
packaged everything into a Windows executable that could be invoked
from their program.

### Prototyping + test and validation

Design thinking is a methodology that integrates the whole product
design lifecycle. However, these last two steps are better served via
agile development; so we will defer it to the rest of the course to
follow.

## Read also

This one is in Spanish, but still: [Qué es y para qué sirve Design
Thinking](https://www.itmadrid.com/que-es-y-para-que-sirve-design-thinking/)
is a short introduction that includes all the main points in the
design thinking process. [This
one](https://www.interaction-design.org/literature/topics/design-thinking)
is effectively focused on interaction design, but describes the
process with precision.

## Activity

Design thinking is ideal to identify and start the design process. In this
activity, we will perform two of the phases, with the following phase taking
place during this same session, but in the framework of the agile thinking
process.

* Empathize: individually, we will try to identify problems we can empathize
  with, soul-searching our own hobbies, research interests, or ideas for a
  startup. This will last for **10 minutes**, and during that time you can
  search the web, talk with your fellow students, ask the tutor, or do
  anything to come up with an idea and a person or groups of persons that have
  that specific problem.

* Pitch: every person will present their idea in two minutes, via
  storytelling. This needs to include the motivation.

* Teams formed along similar ideas, complementary skills, or empathy with other
  people ideas, will be formed. This will be steered by the professor.

## References
