title: "MLOps: Design thinking"
author: "JJ Merelo"
date: "26/6/2022"
output: html_document
bibliography: ../mlops.bib
---

# Design thinking

## TL;DR

Formulating a solution to a problem is never straightforward. Understanding the
problem and the customer is essential for designing a successful machine
learning workflow or application that meets what the customer wishes.

## What are we talking about

Design thinking is a technique, taken from the design community, that
tries to find out the needs of a specific target group in order to
create a product that fulfills, at least in part, those needs
[@designthinking]. It spans all the process from product design to the
creation of a startup, or how a whole company will fulfill their objectives.

In data science, as in any software development project, one of the
hardest part is to find a way to deliver value to a client; even more
so, to actually find there's a client for your product and who would
that be.

Most data science and engineering tutoriales start with already existing datasets; which is nice because you can easily compare the performance of your method, or your team, against others. However, no, no one is interested in a product that tells you who among the Titanic crew or travelers is going to croak or what kind of iris flower we are dealing with looking at the petals and sepals.

You are probably interested in some things that are closer to
yourself, your hobbies or your issues. Or you might be actually
interested in creating a product in a startup. In any case, you need
to go, find out who that person would be (not if it is yourselv) and
find a way to deliver value. Design thinking will help you with that.

## Design thinkin in 5 easy steps

The *design* part of design thinking comes from actual design; it
mimics the process uses in designing user interfaces or products. In
general, science and software development could learn a lot from this
process. While in science (and engineering) we are paper or product
oriented, design is customer oriented. Ikea, for instance, has 5
principles of what they call *democratic* design: Form, Function,
Aesthetics, Sustainability and Price [@ikea].

We will probably need to explain
a bit further the two first ones: form relates to how some product
embeds itself in the living environment; it applies to packaging
too. For instance, you need to create couches that integrate well with
low tables, or chairs that integrate themselves with high tables. A
microwave oven has to be rectangular, and so on. In terms of software
engineering, we need to create products that are well integrated
within the current systems and processes of the company; in terms of
data science, we need to use whatever resources we have available; if
our lab (or company) does not have enough money for an Nvidia
Tesla GPU, we will have to make do with our laptop or the server our
lab has access to.

Function, or course, relates to what the product needs to do. It needs
to be able to do so efficiently, and convey whatever information you
need to convey, or use the data and make the decisions you need to
make. For instance, I remember a project with a company where we
needed to predict book sales. One of the inputs we had was correlated
to sales; number of editions if I remember correctly. Obviously, using
this as an input will make output depend exclusively on that; but also
obviously, the number of editions is not going to be available when
you are releasing a new book and need to find out how many units it's
going to move. The "Function" mantra is an user-centered one, and you
need to follow it closely.

> This is one of the reason why I shy away from using already
> established datasets when teaching data science. Those datasets
> already have inputs and outputs clearly mapped, hiding the
> complexity of the design of a real product under the rug and banning
> the user from actually having to figure out this actual part of the
> process.

The rest is more or less obvious; all five principles will act as
constraints in this design thinking process. Which also has 5 phases:

### Empathize

DT is user centered, and thus it needs to understand, first and
foremost, the needs of the user; in order to do that, the designer
needs to put him or herself in the place of the user, and think what
they would wish; how to add value to them.

Many of the examples in this course will be centered in, well, me,
since I am the customer I have more handy. That will certainly be the
case in most students of this course, with family and friends being
closely seconds or thirds.

I have create data pipelines in several ocassions: during the COVID
pandemic, my main worry was to know when *the curve* was reaching its
peak, and so when the incredibly (some people might say absurdly)
strict lockdown we were suffering in Spain would be lifted. So my main
objective was to try and analyze, daily, how the tide was turning and
when it might definitely turn against COVID.

Currently my worries go more in the direction of the current state of
affairs with the unprovoked attack on Ukraine and the subsequent
genocidal actuation of Russian armed forces. The fog of war, however,
makes it difficult to ascertain how far away from Russia's defeat
Ukraine is. Thus, I will try (and use in this course) some data
sources, mainly so-called OSINT (open source intelligence) sources,
that try to shed some light on the subject.

## See also

This one is in Spanish, but still: [Qué es y para qué sirve Design
Thinking](https://www.itmadrid.com/que-es-y-para-que-sirve-design-thinking/)
is a short introduction that includes all the main points in the
design thinking process.

## References
