---
title: "Agile development"
author: "JJ Merelo"
date: "27/5/2022"
output:
  pdf_document: default
  html_document: default
bibliography: ../mlops.bib
---
# Deploy-to-paper

```{r setup, include=FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(echo = TRUE)
library(arrow)
df <- read_parquet("../data/ukr-mod-data.parquet")
tanks.data <-as.integer(df[ df$` Item` == " tanks",]$` Total` )
```

## TL;DR

Data science and MLOps is very amenable to the creation of workflows that end
with a continuously updated paper, poster or presentation. We will see in this
last chapter how to do it.

## Learning outcomes of this unit

Integrate ML workflow results in a report or paper that will be continuously
updated when data changes. At least an example of such type of languages and
tools will be learned.

## Acceptance criteria

The updateable paper needs to be created, with workflows that trigger their
change.

## "Active" publishing artifacts

One of the possible ways of deploying a workflow is creating a
continuously-updated paper that is uploaded to GitHub or somewhere else. There
are several technologies that can be employed for that, but one of the simplest
is R Markdown, which is the one that is being used for this material.

In general, weaving text with code is called *literary programming*; in general
also, how it works is by using tools called *weave* or *unweave* that
pre-process the source, run the code and capture output to integrate it in the
paper, and the final compilation of all source, original and generated, into a
single *artifact* that can be a paper or can include *active* elements like
interactive charts or even running programs.

The use case for this kind of artifact is, within the realm of open science,
create non-static papers that present, visualize or even run whole workflows
under request.

There are many different ways of doing this, as many as possible scripting
languages and document description languages. As the latter, you have LaTeX and
Markdown, basically; as the latter, R and Python are the two most popular ones
(but we can include Julia recently too).

You are probably already familiar with Markdown, and we will have used examples
with R along this course. At any rate, we will work with R since we can run the
whole way from simple scripts to whole ML workflows, through simple data
manipulation and visualization scripts which will be all we will be doing here.

We will be using [RStudio](https://rstudio.com) for this part, at least the
initial development; eventually it will be generated from a workflow, but the
development part is quite conveniently done here.

## Anatomy of RMarkdown files

These files have two different parts: the YAML front matter, and the weaved text
and R code. YAML is a data serialization format that is used extensively
throughout DevOps workflows. By now we will have already seen examples in the
GitHub Actions, for instance. This is the metadata included in this very file:

```yaml
---
title: "Agile development"
author: "JJ Merelo"
date: "27/5/2022"
output:
  pdf_document: default
  html_document: default
bibliography: ../mlops.bib
---
```

Besides including metadata like title or author, as well as instructions for
RStudio, which is the IDE used for this task, it includes also a pointer to a
bibliography file, placed in the upper directory. This is placed among the three
dashed lines that mark the beginning and end of a YAML "document". Right below,
we will start the text+code itself.

You do not need to make any kind of change to Markdown in order to insert
code. What will be executed will also follow the regular *fenced* syntax you use
for code in Markdown; the only difference is that it will have some arguments
that will help interpret it. For instance, this code is at the top of this file,
invisible:

```markdown
{r setup, include=FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(echo = TRUE)
library(arrow)
df <- read_parquet("../data/ukr-mod-data.parquet")
tanks.data <-as.integer(df[ df$` Item` == " tanks",]$` Total` )
```

> These will be surrounded by code fencing marks, the three backticks. Not
> included here to avoid linting errors. Check [the
> original](https://github.com/JJ/nova-mlops/blob/3dc7c1e374ea51d61037f87ac24c8f6c0d4c7f5f/text/07.Papers.md?plain=1#L12-L17)
> at the repository.

The braced statement says that it is
written in R, gives it a name, `setup`, and also says that the result is not
going to be included in the document (`include=FALSE`); this is why it is
silent.

The rest is simply the first part of the script. It loads a library, `arrow`,
that interprets the Parquet format, and creates a new data structure we will use
later on in the text.

### Example: plot UKR invasion APV losses

```{r tanks}
summary(tanks.data)
```

## Activity

As indicated in the acceptance criteria, the team will have to elaborate a
short report, poster or presentation that will be continuously updated when data
changes. It can include (or not) training, as well as model registry.

## References
